---
published: true
---
## Intro: 
This project is like a hub for other projects, it is about the first RaspberryPi that I started to use as a smartShed system. It constantly runs some of the services and occasionally about once a year I am rewriting the whole code from scratch using new techniques I learned since last time.
## Time: 
November 2015 - August 2017
## Situation: 
After finishing replacing the lock on a door, I really didn’t like having a button outside, so I started researching a way to unlock it using some electronics. At that moment I already had some experience with arduino GPIO and relays, so I decided to use that knowledge hereю
## Task: 
An electronic lock on a door needs some form of an interface to be accessible from outside the shed without having an easy accessible button.
## Action: 
### Act 1: Learning and building basics. 
After playing enough with push buttons to open a door, I decided to try a relay controlled by RaspberryPi. Simply wiring a coil to an ‘always open’ relay, <relay>plugging it to RaspberyPi Gpio I was able to control door by running a very simple python script. <scheme>. The reason to use relay here is that by applying a 5V to relay, we can close or open a separate circuit that might involve other voltage, such as 12V in this case. 
  
> GPIO - General Purpose Input Output, an interface that you can see those days on Arduinos, RaspberyPi or tons of other electric boards for tinkerers this days. Using GPIO you can either control a voltage on a chosen pin to be either 0 or 5V (on some boards like ESP8266 it is 0 or 3.3v) or you can detect what voltage applied to this pin by some other devices, usually sensors. 

 RaspberryPi has a very simple python libraries to work with GPIO, so a first version of my script would look something like this 
  <code></code>
  
It would apply 5v to a pin <pin number>, which will control a relay to close the circuit and open a door for 5 seconds. I would run SSH to my RapsberryPi from my Android phone and run this script in order to get inside. Obviously not very convenient solution, but I loved how I can open a door using my phone, even with some amount of typing.
### Act 2: Optimisation.
Now, when the basic electronics and scripts have been built and learned, I had to optimize the user experience. Obviously, connecting over SSh every time I need to open a door was not a solution I wanted to have permanently, so I started thinking of a more optimized solution. It was a time when I learned about socket programming in one of the classes and it was a perfect answer for my needs. I wrote a simple server script on python, that would listen on a some port, let’s say 1337, and if is would get a simple string “open_door_5” it would open a door. Then I wrote a simple scripts for my macbook and for a Android that would send that signal to that port over the local network and open a door for me. Basically speaking, I implemented a simple API, but I didn’t know it back then. One top of that over few years I built several interface solutions to control a door, each one was successful in its own way, but evolutionally only the few of them is being used now:
Radio Key <link>
Amazon Dash <link>
Website<link>
Keyboard<link>
Face Recognising Camera <link>
I hope I didn’t forget any other.


### Act 3: Scaling 
At the moment, when I wrote an API for controlling one device(door) using one relay from one GPIO on RaspberryPi, I knew I can scale it up to control multiple devices. Initially I plugged a desk lamp in a similar manner, wiring a relay between a lamp and a 12v power supply <diagram>. Eventually I plugged 6 different lights in a same way: 4 light for 4 tables in a shed, one big light and one ‘blue light’. Besides an API for controlling those devices using GPIO, I my had also had a universal access to a devices plugged to my DYI Smart Outlet <link> and few TP link Smart Outlets, which right now I am using for ventilation<link>. In a meanwhile I also have a Temperature/Humidity sensor plugged to the RPi and some other script collecting data from it. <screenshot of the status board> 

Over the years this RPi was also a home for some data collecting scripts(Uber Price Prediction<link>, AmazonDash listener<link>, musicControl<link>), few times SD card burned down during power outage, one time I made an upgrade from RPi1 to RPi2 and some other stories I don’t even remember anymore. 

## Result:
The RPi server that controls the door, light and ventilation in a shed and provides API for external interfaces. 

